README.md, before:

[![CI](https://github.com/isanchez31/opencode-sandbox-plugin/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/isanchez31/opencode-sandbox-plugin/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/opencode-sandbox)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/opencode-sandbox)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

# opencode-sandbox

An [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai) plugin that sandboxes agent-executed commands using [`@anthropic-ai/sandbox-runtime`](https://github.com/anthropic-experimental/sandbox-runtime).

Every `bash` tool invocation is wrapped with OS-level filesystem and network restrictions — no containers, no VMs, just native OS sandboxing primitives.

| Platform | Mechanism |
|----------|-----------|
| **macOS** | `sandbox-exec` (Seatbelt profiles) |
| **Linux** | `bubblewrap` (namespace isolation) |
| **Windows** | Not supported (commands pass through) |

## Install

```json
// opencode.json
{
  "plugin": ["opencode-sandbox"]
}
```

The plugin is automatically installed from npm when OpenCode starts.

### Linux prerequisites

**1. Install bubblewrap:**

```bash
# Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt install bubblewrap

# Fedora
sudo dnf install bubblewrap

# Arch
sudo pacman -S bubblewrap
```

**2. Ubuntu 24.04+ (AppArmor fix):**

Ubuntu 24.04 and later restrict unprivileged user namespaces via AppArmor, which prevents bubblewrap from working. You need to enable the `bwrap-userns-restrict` AppArmor profile:

```bash
# Install the AppArmor profiles package
sudo apt install apparmor-profiles

# Create the symlink to enable the profile
sudo ln -s /etc/apparmor.d/bwrap-userns-restrict /etc/apparmor.d/force-complain/bwrap-userns-restrict

# Load the profile
sudo apparmor_parser -r /etc/apparmor.d/bwrap-userns-restrict
```

You can verify bwrap works:

```bash
bwrap --ro-bind / / --dev /dev --proc /proc -- echo "sandbox works"
```

Without this fix, bwrap will fail with `loopback: Failed RTM_NEWADDR: Operation not permitted` or `setting up uid map: Permission denied`.

## What it does

When the agent runs a bash command, the sandbox enforces three layers of protection:

### Filesystem write protection

Commands can only write to the project directory and `/tmp`. Writing anywhere else returns "Read-only file system":

```
$ touch ~/some-file
touch: cannot touch '/home/user/some-file': Read-only file system

$ echo "data" > /etc/config
/usr/bin/bash: line 1: /etc/config: Read-only file system
```

### Sensitive file read protection

Access to credential directories is blocked:

```
$ cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa
cat: /home/user/.ssh/id_rsa: Permission denied
```

### Network allowlist

Only approved domains are reachable. All other traffic is blocked via a local proxy:

```
$ curl https://evil.com
Connection blocked by network allowlist

$ curl https://registry.npmjs.org
(works — npmjs.org is in the default allowlist)
```

### Default restrictions

**Filesystem (deny-read)**:
- `~/.ssh`, `~/.gnupg`
- `~/.aws/credentials`, `~/.config/gcloud`
- `~/.npmrc`, `~/.env`

**Filesystem (allow-write)**:
- Project directory
- Git worktree (validated — unsafe paths like `/` are rejected)
- `/tmp`

**Network (allow-only)**:
- `registry.npmjs.org`, `*.npmjs.org`
- `registry.yarnpkg.com`
- `pypi.org`, `crates.io`
- `github.com`, `*.github.com`
- `gitlab.com`, `*.gitlab.com`
- `api.openai.com`, `api.anthropic.com`
- `*.googleapis.com`

Everything else is **blocked by default**.

## Configuration

### Option 1: Config file

```json
// .opencode/sandbox.json
{
  "filesystem": {
    "denyRead": ["~/.ssh", "~/.aws/credentials"],
    "allowWrite": [".", "/tmp", "/var/data"],
    "denyWrite": [".env.production"]
  },
  "network": {
    "allowedDomains": [
      "registry.npmjs.org",
      "github.com",
      "*.github.com",
      "api.openai.com",
      "api.anthropic.com",
      "my-internal-api.company.com"
    ],
    "deniedDomains": ["malicious.example.com"]
  }
}
```

### Option 2: Environment variable

```bash
OPENCODE_SANDBOX_CONFIG='{"filesystem":{"denyRead":["~/.ssh"]},"network":{"allowedDomains":["github.com"]}}' opencode
```

### Option 3: Disable

```bash
OPENCODE_DISABLE_SANDBOX=1 opencode
```

Or in `.opencode/sandbox.json`:

```json
{
  "disabled": true
}
```

## How it works

The plugin uses two OpenCode hooks:

1. **`tool.execute.before`** — Intercepts bash commands and wraps them with `SandboxManager.wrapWithSandbox()` before execution
2. **`tool.execute.after`** — Restores the original command in the UI (hides the bwrap wrapper)

```
Agent → bash tool → [plugin wraps command] → sandboxed execution → [plugin restores UI] → Agent
```

The AI model interprets sandbox errors (like "Read-only file system" or "Connection blocked") directly from command output — no additional annotation layer needed.

### Fail-open design

If anything goes wrong (sandbox init fails, wrapping fails, platform unsupported), commands run normally without sandbox. The plugin never breaks your workflow.

## Local development

```bash
# Clone and install
git clone https://github.com/isanchez31/opencode-sandbox-plugin.git
cd opencode-sandbox-plugin
bun install

# Run tests
bun test

# Build
bun run build
```

## Architecture

```
src/
├── index.ts    # Plugin entry — exports SandboxPlugin, hooks into tool.execute.before/after
└── config.ts   # Config loading (env var, .opencode/sandbox.json) + defaults + path validation

test/
├── config.test.ts   # Unit tests for config resolution and path safety
└── plugin.test.ts   # Integration tests for plugin hooks
```

## Related

- [@anthropic-ai/sandbox-runtime](https://github.com/anthropic-experimental/sandbox-runtime) — The underlying sandbox engine
- [OpenCode Plugins Docs](https://opencode.ai/docs/plugins) — How to create and use plugins
- [Claude Code Sandboxing](https://docs.claude.com/en/docs/claude-code/sandboxing) — Anthropic's sandboxing documentation

Commit message:

docs: replace local development and architecture sections with CONTRIBUTING.md link

README.md, after:

[![CI](https://github.com/isanchez31/opencode-sandbox-plugin/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/isanchez31/opencode-sandbox-plugin/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/opencode-sandbox)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/opencode-sandbox)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

# opencode-sandbox

An [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai) plugin that sandboxes agent-executed commands using [`@anthropic-ai/sandbox-runtime`](https://github.com/anthropic-experimental/sandbox-runtime).

Every `bash` tool invocation is wrapped with OS-level filesystem and network restrictions — no containers, no VMs, just native OS sandboxing primitives.

| Platform | Mechanism |
|----------|-----------|
| **macOS** | `sandbox-exec` (Seatbelt profiles) |
| **Linux** | `bubblewrap` (namespace isolation) |
| **Windows** | Not supported (commands pass through) |

## Install

```json
// opencode.json
{
  "plugin": ["opencode-sandbox"]
}
```

The plugin is automatically installed from npm when OpenCode starts.

### Linux prerequisites

**1. Install bubblewrap:**

```bash
# Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt install bubblewrap

# Fedora
sudo dnf install bubblewrap

# Arch
sudo pacman -S bubblewrap
```

**2. Ubuntu 24.04+ (AppArmor fix):**

Ubuntu 24.04 and later restrict unprivileged user namespaces via AppArmor, which prevents bubblewrap from working. You need to enable the `bwrap-userns-restrict` AppArmor profile:

```bash
# Install the AppArmor profiles package
sudo apt install apparmor-profiles

# Create the symlink to enable the profile
sudo ln -s /etc/apparmor.d/bwrap-userns-restrict /etc/apparmor.d/force-complain/bwrap-userns-restrict

# Load the profile
sudo apparmor_parser -r /etc/apparmor.d/bwrap-userns-restrict
```

You can verify bwrap works:

```bash
bwrap --ro-bind / / --dev /dev --proc /proc -- echo "sandbox works"
```

Without this fix, bwrap will fail with `loopback: Failed RTM_NEWADDR: Operation not permitted` or `setting up uid map: Permission denied`.

## What it does

When the agent runs a bash command, the sandbox enforces three layers of protection:

### Filesystem write protection

Commands can only write to the project directory and `/tmp`. Writing anywhere else returns "Read-only file system":

```
$ touch ~/some-file
touch: cannot touch '/home/user/some-file': Read-only file system

$ echo "data" > /etc/config
/usr/bin/bash: line 1: /etc/config: Read-only file system
```

### Sensitive file read protection

Access to credential directories is blocked:

```
$ cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa
cat: /home/user/.ssh/id_rsa: Permission denied
```

### Network allowlist

Only approved domains are reachable. All other traffic is blocked via a local proxy:

```
$ curl https://evil.com
Connection blocked by network allowlist

$ curl https://registry.npmjs.org
(works — npmjs.org is in the default allowlist)
```

### Default restrictions

**Filesystem (deny-read)**:
- `~/.ssh`, `~/.gnupg`
- `~/.aws/credentials`, `~/.config/gcloud`
- `~/.npmrc`, `~/.env`

**Filesystem (allow-write)**:
- Project directory
- Git worktree (validated — unsafe paths like `/` are rejected)
- `/tmp`

**Network (allow-only)**:
- `registry.npmjs.org`, `*.npmjs.org`
- `registry.yarnpkg.com`
- `pypi.org`, `crates.io`
- `github.com`, `*.github.com`
- `gitlab.com`, `*.gitlab.com`
- `api.openai.com`, `api.anthropic.com`
- `*.googleapis.com`

Everything else is **blocked by default**.

## Configuration

### Option 1: Config file

```json
// .opencode/sandbox.json
{
  "filesystem": {
    "denyRead": ["~/.ssh", "~/.aws/credentials"],
    "allowWrite": [".", "/tmp", "/var/data"],
    "denyWrite": [".env.production"]
  },
  "network": {
    "allowedDomains": [
      "registry.npmjs.org",
      "github.com",
      "*.github.com",
      "api.openai.com",
      "api.anthropic.com",
      "my-internal-api.company.com"
    ],
    "deniedDomains": ["malicious.example.com"]
  }
}
```

### Option 2: Environment variable

```bash
OPENCODE_SANDBOX_CONFIG='{"filesystem":{"denyRead":["~/.ssh"]},"network":{"allowedDomains":["github.com"]}}' opencode
```

### Option 3: Disable

```bash
OPENCODE_DISABLE_SANDBOX=1 opencode
```

Or in `.opencode/sandbox.json`:

```json
{
  "disabled": true
}
```

## How it works

The plugin uses two OpenCode hooks:

1. **`tool.execute.before`** — Intercepts bash commands and wraps them with `SandboxManager.wrapWithSandbox()` before execution
2. **`tool.execute.after`** — Restores the original command in the UI (hides the bwrap wrapper)

```
Agent → bash tool → [plugin wraps command] → sandboxed execution → [plugin restores UI] → Agent
```

The AI model interprets sandbox errors (like "Read-only file system" or "Connection blocked") directly from command output — no additional annotation layer needed.

### Fail-open design

If anything goes wrong (sandbox init fails, wrapping fails, platform unsupported), commands run normally without sandbox. The plugin never breaks your workflow.

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for development setup, architecture, and guidelines.

## Related

- [@anthropic-ai/sandbox-runtime](https://github.com/anthropic-experimental/sandbox-runtime) — The underlying sandbox engine
- [OpenCode Plugins Docs](https://opencode.ai/docs/plugins) — How to create and use plugins
- [Claude Code Sandboxing](https://docs.claude.com/en/docs/claude-code/sandboxing) — Anthropic's sandboxing documentation
